Hammer toe is a deformity
caused by a permanent bend at
the middle joint of a toe.
The middle of the toe bends upwards
while the tip points downward,
causing the toe to resemble a hammer.
A person with a hammer toe may also have
corns or calluses on the top of the joint
bending upward
or the tip bending downward.
Hammer toe is commonly caused
by wearing shoes that are
too short or tight,
have narrow pointy toes,
and heels that are too high.
Shoes that are too short
or narrow and pointy
push the smaller toes into a bent position.
Very high heels
shift your weight forward
onto your toes.
When the toes are forced
against the front of the shoe,
they bend under.
If the tendons that straighten
and bend the toes are held in one
position too long,
they tighten and can’t stretch out.
If caught early
and the toe is still flexible,
hammer toe may be treated
by wearing roomier footwear.
Once the toe is rigid,
surgery may be needed to straighten it
by cutting the tendon
and sometimes removing pieces of bone.